README.md, before:

![QuActuary header image](images/qc-header.jpg)
# *qu*Actuary: quantum-powered actuarial tools

Quantum-powered actuarial tools for Python that dramatically accelerate risk calculations without requiring quantum programming expertise.

*This package is still under development, presently focused on Property & Casualty (non-life) techniques.*

## Introduction

Actuarial computations often involve heavy simulation and complex models for pricing and reserving. **quActuary** aims to empower actuaries with quantum computing speedups (e.g., quadratic Monte Carlo gains) without requiring quantum expertise. The package will wrap IBM’s Qiskit v1.4.2 (including `qiskit_algorithms` and `qiskit_aer`) to abstract away the design of quantum circuits.

## Key Goals

- **Black-Box Ease of Use:** Provide high-level, Pythonic pandas-like interfaces for common tasks (pricing, reserving, risk measures) so that actuaries can call quantum-accelerated computations with minimal code.
- **Deeper Quantum Access:** Allow advanced users to inspect and tweak quantum circuits/algorithms. For example, users can retrieve underlying Qiskit circuits or adjust algorithm parameters (e.g. change the amplitude estimation method or number of shots).
- **Seamless Backend Switching:** Enable development on local simulators (Qiskit Aer) and easily switch to IBM Quantum hardware for production runs, without requiring code changes aside from selecting a backend.
- Actuarial Familiarity: Use terminology and data structures familiar to actuaries (such as DataFrames for loss triangles or exposures) to flatten the learning curve.

By meeting these goals, quActuary will let actuaries harness quantum computing’s potential speedups in Monte Carlo simulation and optimization while focusing on actuarial logic and business solutions instead of tinkering with quantum mechanics and quantum circuit engineering.

## Roadmap
- Phase 1: Core Simulation Functions for Risk Pricing
  - Excess Loss Calculations
  - VaR and TVaR
  - Quantum Monte Carlo
- Phase 2: Reserving
  - IBNR Estimation
  - Basic Reserving Methods
  - Mack Method
  - Quantum Copula
  - Tail Risk, Risk Margin and Risk-of-Ruin Models
- Phase 3: Advanced Models
  - Generalized Linear Models
  - Portfolio Optimization
- Phase 4: Beyond P&C
  - Life Insurance Applications
- Phase 5: Value-Add
  - Quantum Data Privacy & Security

## Example Usage Patterns

### Excess Severity Pricing

An actuary wants to calculate the expected excess loss for a portfolio, above a retention *L* with a given coinsurance  *c*. They have fitted a loss severity distribution (such as a lognormal with parameters μ, σ). Using **quActuary**:

```python
import quactuary as qa
from quactuary.distributions.frequency import Poisson, DeterministicFreq
from quactuary.distributions.severity  import Lognormal, ConstantSev
from quactuary.entities import PolicyTerms, Inforce, Portfolio
from quactuary.pricing.excess_loss_model import ExcessLossModel

# --- General Liability Bucket ---------------------------------------------
gl_terms = PolicyTerms(per_occ_deductible=200_000, coinsurance=0.10)
gl_freq  = Poisson(mu=0.25)
gl_sev   = Lognormal(mu=11.5, sigma=1.2)
gl_inforce = Inforce(n_policies=10_000,
                     freq=gl_freq,
                     sev=gl_sev,
                     terms=gl_terms,
                     name="General Liability")

# --- Workers’ Comp Bucket ---------------------------------------------------
wc_terms = PolicyTerms(per_occ_deductible=0, per_occ_limit=1_000_000)
wc_freq  = DeterministicFreq(k=1)  # exactly 1 claim each year
wc_sev   = ConstantSev(amount=80_000)
wc_inforce = Inforce(n_policies=5_000,
                     freq=wc_freq,
                     sev=wc_sev,
                     terms=wc_terms,
                     name="Workers Comp")

# --- Book of Business -------------------------------------------------------
portfolio = Portfolio([gl_inforce, wc_inforce])

# --- Quantum Excess Loss layer ---------------------------------------------
layer = ExcessLossModel(portfolio, deductible=1_000_000, limit=4_000_000)

# Test using Classical Monte Carlo
mc_loss = layer.compute_excess_loss(classical_samples=1_000_000)
print("Classical Expected Excess Loss:", mc_loss)

# When ready, run a quantum session
q_layer_loss = layer.compute_excess_loss(confidence=0.95)
print("Quantum layer expected loss:", q_layer_loss)
```

In this example, `ExcessLossModel` loads the specified distributions into a quantum state (using an n-qubit discrete approximation) and builds the circuit needed for the excess loss algorithm on a book of business. The user is not expected to be proficient in quantum circuit design.

Commit message:

Add quantum actuarial functionality and pricing models
- Implemented QuantumActuarialModel in quantum.py to manage quantum circuit creation and execution for actuarial calculations.
- Introduced BackendManager to handle backend configurations for quantum simulations.
- Developed ExcessLossModel and RiskMeasureModel in pricing.py, extending QuantumActuarialModel for specific pricing and risk measurement functionalities.
- Established a framework for integrating classical and quantum methods in actuarial pricing.

README.md, after:

![QuActuary header image](images/qc-header.jpg)
# *qu*Actuary: quantum-powered actuarial tools

A high-level, **pandas**-integrated actuarial framework with optional quantum acceleration without requiring quantum programming expertise.

*This package is still under development, presently focused on Property & Casualty (non-life) techniques.*

## Introduction

Actuarial computations often involve heavy simulation and complex models for pricing and reserving. **quActuary** aims to empower actuaries with quantum computing speedups (e.g., quadratic Monte Carlo gains) without requiring quantum expertise. The package will wrap IBM’s Qiskit v1.4.2 (including `qiskit_algorithms` and `qiskit_aer`) to abstract away the design of quantum circuits.

The design leverages existing actuarial Python libraries (e.g. **chainladder-python** for reserving, **aggregate** for FFT-based aggregate loss distributions, **gemact** for collective risk models and copulas) to minimize new implementations. Each model class (e.g. for pricing or risk) will embed quantum computing as a pluggable backend, so users can toggle between classical and quantum execution without needing quantum expertise.

The API will feel familiar to actuaries (pandas data structures, common actuarial terminology) while hiding quantum mechanics details. Default model outputs will be provided as pandas `Series` or `DataFrame` for seamless downstream analysis.

![Duck resting on a panda](images/panda-duck.png)

## Key Goals

- **Black-Box Ease of Use:** Provide high-level, Pythonic pandas-like interfaces for common tasks (pricing, reserving, risk measures) so that actuaries can call quantum-accelerated computations with minimal code.
- **Deeper Quantum Access:** Allow advanced users to inspect and tweak quantum circuits/algorithms. For example, users can retrieve underlying Qiskit circuits or adjust algorithm parameters (e.g. change the amplitude estimation method or number of shots).
- **Seamless Backend Switching:** Enable development on local simulators (Qiskit Aer) and easily switch to IBM Quantum hardware for production runs, without requiring code changes aside from selecting a backend.
- Actuarial Familiarity: Use terminology and data structures familiar to actuaries (such as DataFrames for loss triangles or exposures) to flatten the learning curve.

By meeting these goals, quActuary will let actuaries harness quantum computing’s potential speedups in Monte Carlo simulation and optimization while focusing on actuarial logic and business solutions instead of tinkering with quantum mechanics and quantum circuit engineering.

## Roadmap
- Phase 1: Core Simulation Functions for Risk Pricing
  - Excess Loss Calculations
  - VaR and TVaR
  - Quantum Monte Carlo
- Phase 2: Reserving
  - IBNR Estimation
  - Basic Reserving Methods
  - Mack Method
  - Quantum Copula
  - Tail Risk, Risk Margin and Risk-of-Ruin Models
- Phase 3: Advanced Models
  - Generalized Linear Models
  - Portfolio Optimization
- Phase 4: Beyond P&C
  - Life Insurance Applications
- Phase 5: Value-Add
  - Quantum Data Privacy & Security

## Example Usage Patterns

### Excess Severity Pricing

An actuary wants to calculate the expected excess loss for a portfolio, above a retention *L* with a given coinsurance  *c*. They have fitted a loss severity distribution (such as a lognormal with parameters μ, σ). Using **quActuary**:

```python
import quactuary as qa
from quactuary.distributions.frequency import Poisson, DeterministicFreq
from quactuary.distributions.severity  import Lognormal, ConstantSev
from quactuary.entities import PolicyTerms, Inforce, Portfolio
from quactuary.pricing.excess_loss_model import ExcessLossModel

# --- General Liability Bucket ---------------------------------------------
gl_terms = PolicyTerms(per_occ_deductible=200_000, coinsurance=0.10)
gl_freq  = Poisson(mu=0.25)
gl_sev   = Lognormal(mu=11.5, sigma=1.2)
gl_inforce = Inforce(n_policies=10_000,
                     freq=gl_freq,
                     sev=gl_sev,
                     terms=gl_terms,
                     name="General Liability")

# --- Workers’ Comp Bucket ---------------------------------------------------
wc_terms = PolicyTerms(per_occ_deductible=0, per_occ_limit=1_000_000)
wc_freq  = DeterministicFreq(k=1)  # exactly 1 claim each year
wc_sev   = ConstantSev(amount=80_000)
wc_inforce = Inforce(n_policies=5_000,
                     freq=wc_freq,
                     sev=wc_sev,
                     terms=wc_terms,
                     name="Workers Comp")

# --- Book of Business -------------------------------------------------------
portfolio = Portfolio([gl_inforce, wc_inforce])

# --- Quantum Excess Loss layer ---------------------------------------------
layer = ExcessLossModel(portfolio, deductible=1_000_000, limit=4_000_000)

# Test using Classical Monte Carlo
mc_loss = layer.compute_excess_loss(classical_samples=1_000_000)
print("Classical Expected Excess Loss:", mc_loss)

# When ready, run a quantum session
q_layer_loss = layer.compute_excess_loss(confidence=0.95)
print("Quantum layer expected loss:", q_layer_loss)
```

In this example, `ExcessLossModel` loads the specified distributions into a quantum state (using an n-qubit discrete approximation) and builds the circuit needed for the excess loss algorithm on a book of business. The user is not expected to be proficient in quantum circuit design.
