.project_management/03_SPRINTS/S01_M01_Classical_Optimization/T03_S01_Sobol_Sequences.md, before:

---
task_id: T03_S01
sprint_sequence_id: S01
status: in_progress # open | in_progress | pending_review | done | failed | blocked
complexity: Medium # Low | Medium | High
last_updated: 2025-05-24
---

# Task: Implement Sobol Sequences for Quasi-Monte Carlo

## Description
Implement Sobol sequences as a low-discrepancy sequence generator to replace standard pseudo-random number generation in Monte Carlo simulations. Sobol sequences provide better uniformity in high-dimensional spaces, leading to faster convergence rates (O(log(N)^d/N) vs O(1/√N)) and reduced variance, especially in tail estimation.

## Goal / Objectives
- Replace random sampling with Sobol sequence generation where applicable
- Achieve faster convergence for risk measures (VaR, TVaR)
- Improve tail distribution accuracy with fewer samples
- Maintain compatibility with existing simulation infrastructure
- Support both CPU and potential GPU implementations

## Technical Requirements
- Support dimensions up to 1000+ for large portfolios
- Implement proper initialization and scrambling techniques
- Handle correlation structures through copula transformation
- Maintain numerical precision in sequence generation
- Support parallel generation for distributed computing

## Acceptance Criteria
- [ ] Sobol sequences show demonstrable convergence improvement over pseudo-random
- [ ] Tail risk measures (99.5% VaR) converge 5-10x faster
- [ ] Integration is seamless - users can switch with a single parameter
- [ ] Performance overhead is less than 20% vs pseudo-random generation
- [ ] Test coverage exceeds 95% for new Sobol-related code

## Subtasks

### 1. Sobol Sequence Implementation
- [ ] Implement core Sobol sequence generator using direction numbers
- [ ] Use Sobol direction numbers from Joe & Kuo (up to 21201 dimensions)
- [ ] Implement Gray code optimization for sequential generation
- [ ] Add support for skipping initial points (common practice is 2^10)
- [ ] Implement 32-bit and 64-bit precision variants

### 2. Scrambling and Randomization
- [ ] Implement Owen scrambling for randomized QMC
- [ ] Add digital shift randomization option
- [ ] Implement Matousek's random linear scrambling
- [ ] Support multiple independent randomizations for error estimation
- [ ] Document when each scrambling method is most appropriate

### 3. Integration Points in Simulation Framework

#### Frequency Sampling
- [ ] Replace uniform random draws in frequency distribution sampling
- [ ] Map Sobol points through inverse CDF for each distribution
- [ ] Handle discrete distributions (Poisson, Negative Binomial, etc.)

#### Severity Sampling
- [ ] Implement Sobol sampling for continuous severity distributions
- [ ] Support conditional sampling given frequency realization
- [ ] Maintain proper dimensional allocation for nested sampling

#### Correlation Handling
- [ ] Integrate with copula methods for dependent risks
- [ ] Implement proper dimension allocation for correlation matrix
- [ ] Support both Gaussian and t-copulas with Sobol sequences

### 4. Dimension Allocation Strategy
- [ ] Design dimension mapping for simulation components:
  - Dimensions 1-K: Frequency draws for K policies
  - Dimensions K+1-2K: Severity base draws
  - Dimensions 2K+1-end: Additional severity draws for multiple claims
- [ ] Implement dynamic dimension allocation based on portfolio size
- [ ] Add dimension recycling for very high claim counts

### 5. Convergence Monitoring
- [ ] Implement convergence diagnostics specific to QMC
- [ ] Add effective sample size calculation for Sobol sequences
- [ ] Create variance reduction factor metrics
- [ ] Implement automatic stopping criteria based on convergence

### 6. Performance Optimization
- [ ] Vectorize Sobol generation for batch processing
- [ ] Implement cache-friendly memory access patterns
- [ ] Add multi-threaded generation for independent sequences
- [ ] Consider GPU implementation using CuPy/PyTorch
- [ ] Benchmark against existing random sampling

### 7. User Interface Design
- [ ] Add `qmc_method` parameter to PricingModel:
  - Options: "sobol", "halton", "random" (default)
- [ ] Add `qmc_scramble` parameter for scrambling options
- [ ] Implement `qmc_skip` parameter for burn-in
- [ ] Provide convergence diagnostics in results
- [ ] Add visualization tools for sequence uniformity

### 8. Testing and Validation
- [ ] Unit tests for Sobol sequence properties:
  - Uniformity tests in multiple dimensions
  - Low-discrepancy verification
  - Scrambling randomness tests
- [ ] Integration tests with all distribution types
- [ ] Convergence tests comparing QMC vs standard MC
- [ ] Stress tests with high-dimensional portfolios
- [ ] Validation against analytical results where available

## Implementation Notes
- Start with established library (scipy.stats.qmc) and enhance as needed
- Owen scrambling is essential for confidence intervals
- Dimension allocation is critical - poor allocation negates QMC benefits
- Consider antithetic variates combination for further variance reduction
- Document computational complexity vs standard methods

## References
- Owen, A. B. (2003). "Quasi-Monte Carlo Sampling"
- Joe, S. & Kuo, F. Y. (2008). "Constructing Sobol sequences"
- L'Ecuyer, P. & Lemieux, C. (2002). "Recent Advances in Randomized QMC"
- Example notebook: `/quactuary/usage/Sobol Sequence Example.ipynb`

## Output Log

### 2025-05-24 17:40 - Task Review
- Completely rewrote task with comprehensive technical details
- Added specific implementation strategies for Sobol sequences
- Included dimension allocation and scrambling techniques
- Added performance targets and convergence criteria
- Status: Ready for implementation

Commit message:

Worked on Compound Distributions
Add comprehensive tests for pricing module and improve coverage

- Introduced comprehensive tests in `test_pricing_comprehensive.py` to achieve 95%+ coverage, testing all branches, compound distribution integration, and edge cases.
- Created additional test files: `test_pricing_coverage.py` and `test_pricing_full_coverage.py` for focused coverage and edge case testing.
- Updated `requirements-dev.txt` to specify versions for testing dependencies and ensure compatibility.
- Mocked necessary components to facilitate testing without external dependencies.

.project_management/03_SPRINTS/S01_M01_Classical_Optimization/T03_S01_Sobol_Sequences.md, after:

---
task_id: T03_S01
sprint_sequence_id: S01
status: in_progress # open | in_progress | pending_review | done | failed | blocked
complexity: Medium # Low | Medium | High
last_updated: 2025-05-24
---

# Task: Implement Sobol Sequences for Quasi-Monte Carlo

## Description
Implement Sobol sequences as a low-discrepancy sequence generator to replace standard pseudo-random number generation in Monte Carlo simulations. Sobol sequences provide better uniformity in high-dimensional spaces, leading to faster convergence rates (O(log(N)^d/N) vs O(1/√N)) and reduced variance, especially in tail estimation.

## Goal / Objectives
- Replace random sampling with Sobol sequence generation where applicable
- Achieve faster convergence for risk measures (VaR, TVaR)
- Improve tail distribution accuracy with fewer samples
- Maintain compatibility with existing simulation infrastructure
- Support both CPU and potential GPU implementations

## Technical Requirements
- Support dimensions up to 1000+ for large portfolios
- Implement proper initialization and scrambling techniques
- Handle correlation structures through copula transformation
- Maintain numerical precision in sequence generation
- Support parallel generation for distributed computing

## Acceptance Criteria
- [ ] Sobol sequences show demonstrable convergence improvement over pseudo-random
- [ ] Tail risk measures (99.5% VaR) converge 5-10x faster
- [ ] Integration is seamless - users can switch with a single parameter
- [ ] Performance overhead is less than 20% vs pseudo-random generation
- [ ] Test coverage exceeds 95% for new Sobol-related code

## Subtasks

### 1. Sobol Sequence Implementation
- [ ] Implement core Sobol sequence generator using direction numbers
- [ ] Use Sobol direction numbers from Joe & Kuo (up to 21201 dimensions)
- [ ] Implement Gray code optimization for sequential generation
- [ ] Add support for skipping initial points (common practice is 2^10)
- [ ] Implement 32-bit and 64-bit precision variants

### 2. Scrambling and Randomization
- [ ] Implement Owen scrambling for randomized QMC
- [ ] Add digital shift randomization option
- [ ] Implement Matousek's random linear scrambling
- [ ] Support multiple independent randomizations for error estimation
- [ ] Document when each scrambling method is most appropriate

### 3. Integration Points in Simulation Framework

#### Frequency Sampling
- [ ] Replace uniform random draws in frequency distribution sampling
- [ ] Map Sobol points through inverse CDF for each distribution
- [ ] Handle discrete distributions (Poisson, Negative Binomial, etc.)

#### Severity Sampling
- [ ] Implement Sobol sampling for continuous severity distributions
- [ ] Support conditional sampling given frequency realization
- [ ] Maintain proper dimensional allocation for nested sampling

#### Correlation Handling
- [ ] Integrate with copula methods for dependent risks
- [ ] Implement proper dimension allocation for correlation matrix
- [ ] Support both Gaussian and t-copulas with Sobol sequences

### 4. Dimension Allocation Strategy
- [ ] Design dimension mapping for simulation components:
  - Dimensions 1-K: Frequency draws for K policies
  - Dimensions K+1-2K: Severity base draws
  - Dimensions 2K+1-end: Additional severity draws for multiple claims
- [ ] Implement dynamic dimension allocation based on portfolio size
- [ ] Add dimension recycling for very high claim counts

### 5. Convergence Monitoring
- [ ] Implement convergence diagnostics specific to QMC
- [ ] Add effective sample size calculation for Sobol sequences
- [ ] Create variance reduction factor metrics
- [ ] Implement automatic stopping criteria based on convergence

### 6. Performance Optimization
- [ ] Vectorize Sobol generation for batch processing
- [ ] Implement cache-friendly memory access patterns
- [ ] Add multi-threaded generation for independent sequences
- [ ] Consider GPU implementation using CuPy/PyTorch
- [ ] Benchmark against existing random sampling

### 7. User Interface Design
- [ ] Add `qmc_method` parameter to PricingModel:
  - Options: "sobol", "halton", "random" (default)
- [ ] Add `qmc_scramble` parameter for scrambling options
- [ ] Implement `qmc_skip` parameter for burn-in
- [ ] Provide convergence diagnostics in results
- [ ] Add visualization tools for sequence uniformity

### 8. Testing and Validation
- [ ] Unit tests for Sobol sequence properties:
  - Uniformity tests in multiple dimensions
  - Low-discrepancy verification
  - Scrambling randomness tests
- [ ] Integration tests with all distribution types
- [ ] Convergence tests comparing QMC vs standard MC
- [ ] Stress tests with high-dimensional portfolios
- [ ] Validation against analytical results where available

### 9. Adaptive Discretization Enhancement (from T02_S01)
- [ ] Implement dynamic grid sizing based on distribution parameters
- [ ] Add error estimation for discretization accuracy
- [ ] Implement automatic refinement for tail regions
- [ ] Integrate with Sobol sequences for optimal grid point placement
- [ ] Add convergence monitoring for discretization error

## Implementation Notes
- Start with established library (scipy.stats.qmc) and enhance as needed
- Owen scrambling is essential for confidence intervals
- Dimension allocation is critical - poor allocation negates QMC benefits
- Consider antithetic variates combination for further variance reduction
- Document computational complexity vs standard methods

## References
- Owen, A. B. (2003). "Quasi-Monte Carlo Sampling"
- Joe, S. & Kuo, F. Y. (2008). "Constructing Sobol sequences"
- L'Ecuyer, P. & Lemieux, C. (2002). "Recent Advances in Randomized QMC"
- Example notebook: `/quactuary/usage/Sobol Sequence Example.ipynb`

## Output Log

### 2025-05-24 17:40 - Task Review
- Completely rewrote task with comprehensive technical details
- Added specific implementation strategies for Sobol sequences
- Included dimension allocation and scrambling techniques
- Added performance targets and convergence criteria
- Status: Ready for implementation
