.project_management/03_SPRINTS/S02_M02_Quantum_Foundation/T03_S02_Quantum_State_Preparation.md, before:

---
task_id: T03_S02
sprint_sequence_id: S02
status: open
complexity: High
last_updated: 2025-01-25T00:00:00Z
---

# Task: Quantum State Preparation Utilities

## Description
Implement fundamental quantum state preparation utilities that will be used across various quantum algorithms. This includes amplitude encoding, probability distribution loading, and quantum state initialization techniques.

## Goal / Objectives
- Implement core quantum state preparation functions
- Create utilities for encoding classical data into quantum states
- Build amplitude encoding for probability distributions
- Develop efficient state preparation circuits

## Acceptance Criteria
- [ ] Amplitude encoding function implemented for probability distributions
- [ ] State preparation utilities handle edge cases (normalization, etc.)
- [ ] Unit tests verify correctness of state preparation
- [ ] Performance benchmarks for state preparation circuits
- [ ] Documentation with examples for each utility

## Subtasks
- [ ] Implement amplitude_encode() for probability distributions
- [ ] Create uniform_superposition() utility
- [ ] Implement controlled rotation gates for state preparation
- [ ] Add normalization and validation utilities
- [ ] Create quantum_state_utils.py module
- [ ] Write unit tests for state preparation functions
- [ ] Add docstrings and usage examples

## Implementation Guidelines

### Amplitude Encoding Implementation
Based on the Excess Loss algorithm pattern:

```python
# quactuary/quantum/state_preparation/amplitude_encoding.py
import numpy as np
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
from qiskit.circuit.library import StatePreparation
from typing import List, Union

def amplitude_encode(probabilities: Union[List[float], np.ndarray], 
                    num_qubits: int = None) -> QuantumCircuit:
    """
    Encode probability distribution as quantum amplitudes.
    
    Following the Excess Loss example pattern:
    - Discretize domain into 2^num_qubits points
    - Normalize to create valid quantum state
    - Use StatePreparation for encoding
    """
    probabilities = np.array(probabilities)
    
    # Determine number of qubits needed
    if num_qubits is None:
        num_qubits = int(np.ceil(np.log2(len(probabilities))))
    
    # Pad or truncate to 2^num_qubits
    state_size = 2**num_qubits
    if len(probabilities) < state_size:
        probabilities = np.pad(probabilities, (0, state_size - len(probabilities)))
    elif len(probabilities) > state_size:
        probabilities = probabilities[:state_size]
    
    # Normalize to create valid quantum state (amplitudes)
    amplitudes = np.sqrt(probabilities / np.sum(probabilities))
    
    # Create circuit with StatePreparation
    qc = QuantumCircuit(num_qubits)
    qc.append(StatePreparation(amplitudes), range(num_qubits))
    
    return qc
```

### Probability Distribution Loader
```python
# quactuary/quantum/state_preparation/probability_loader.py
from scipy import stats
import numpy as np

def prepare_lognormal_state(mu: float, sigma: float, 
                           num_qubits: int = 6) -> np.ndarray:
    """
    Prepare lognormal distribution for quantum encoding.
    Based on Excess Loss algorithm approach.
    """
    # Create discretized domain
    num_points = 2**num_qubits
    x_min, x_max = 0.1, 10.0  # Domain bounds
    x_points = np.linspace(x_min, x_max, num_points)
    
    # Calculate probabilities
    dist = stats.lognorm(s=sigma, scale=np.exp(mu))
    probabilities = dist.pdf(x_points)
    
    # Normalize
    probabilities = probabilities / np.sum(probabilities)
    
    return probabilities, x_points
```

### Efficient State Preparation Patterns
```python
def uniform_superposition(num_qubits: int) -> QuantumCircuit:
    """Create uniform superposition using Hadamard gates."""
    qc = QuantumCircuit(num_qubits)
    qc.h(range(num_qubits))  # Efficient broadcast
    return qc

def controlled_rotation_encoding(angles: List[float]) -> QuantumCircuit:
    """Encode using controlled rotations for sparse states."""
    n = int(np.ceil(np.log2(len(angles))))
    qc = QuantumCircuit(n)
    
    # Use gray code ordering for efficiency
    for i, angle in enumerate(angles):
        if angle != 0:
            # Apply controlled rotation based on binary representation
            binary = format(i, f'0{n}b')
            control_qubits = [j for j, bit in enumerate(binary) if bit == '1']
            if control_qubits:
                qc.mcry(angle, control_qubits[:-1], control_qubits[-1])
            else:
                qc.ry(angle, 0)
    
    return qc
```

### Validation Utilities
```python
def validate_quantum_state(amplitudes: np.ndarray) -> bool:
    """Validate that amplitudes form a valid quantum state."""
    # Check normalization
    norm = np.sum(np.abs(amplitudes)**2)
    if not np.isclose(norm, 1.0, rtol=1e-10):
        raise ValueError(f"State not normalized: norm={norm}")
    
    # Check power of 2
    n = len(amplitudes)
    if n & (n - 1) != 0:
        raise ValueError(f"State size must be power of 2, got {n}")
    
    return True
```

### Best Practices from Research
1. **Use StatePreparation for general distributions** - Most efficient for arbitrary states
2. **Optimize circuit depth** - Use transpile with optimization_level=3
3. **Consider sparsity** - Use specialized encodings for sparse distributions
4. **Validate inputs** - Always check normalization and dimensions
5. **Use analytical solutions when possible** - Avoid numerical approximations

## Output Log
*(This section is populated as work progresses on the task)*

Commit message:

docs: update quantum foundation sprint tasks with completion status
- Mark quantum environment setup task as completed
- Update quantum state preparation task with implementation progress
- Add completion timestamps and output logs

.project_management/03_SPRINTS/S02_M02_Quantum_Foundation/T03_S02_Quantum_State_Preparation.md, after:

---
task_id: T03_S02
sprint_sequence_id: S02
status: in_progress
complexity: High
last_updated: 2025-01-25T00:00:00Z
---

# Task: Quantum State Preparation Utilities

## Description
Implement fundamental quantum state preparation utilities that will be used across various quantum algorithms. This includes amplitude encoding, probability distribution loading, and quantum state initialization techniques.

## Goal / Objectives
- Implement core quantum state preparation functions
- Create utilities for encoding classical data into quantum states
- Build amplitude encoding for probability distributions
- Develop efficient state preparation circuits

## Acceptance Criteria
- [x] Amplitude encoding function implemented for probability distributions
- [x] State preparation utilities handle edge cases (normalization, etc.)
- [x] Unit tests verify correctness of state preparation
- [ ] Performance benchmarks for state preparation circuits
- [x] Documentation with examples for each utility

## Subtasks
- [x] Implement amplitude_encode() for probability distributions
- [x] Create uniform_superposition() utility
- [x] Implement controlled rotation gates for state preparation
- [x] Add normalization and validation utilities
- [x] Create quantum_state_utils.py module
- [x] Write unit tests for state preparation functions
- [x] Add docstrings and usage examples

## Implementation Guidelines

### Amplitude Encoding Implementation
Based on the Excess Loss algorithm pattern:

```python
# quactuary/quantum/state_preparation/amplitude_encoding.py
import numpy as np
from qiskit import QuantumCircuit
from qiskit.circuit.library import StatePreparation
from typing import List, Union

def amplitude_encode(probabilities: Union[List[float], np.ndarray], 
                    num_qubits: int = None) -> QuantumCircuit:
    """
    Encode probability distribution as quantum amplitudes.
    
    Following the Excess Loss example pattern:
    - Discretize domain into 2^num_qubits points
    - Normalize to create valid quantum state
    - Use StatePreparation for encoding
    """
    probabilities = np.array(probabilities)
    
    # Determine number of qubits needed
    if num_qubits is None:
        num_qubits = int(np.ceil(np.log2(len(probabilities))))
    
    # Pad or truncate to 2^num_qubits
    state_size = 2**num_qubits
    if len(probabilities) < state_size:
        probabilities = np.pad(probabilities, (0, state_size - len(probabilities)))
    elif len(probabilities) > state_size:
        probabilities = probabilities[:state_size]
    
    # Normalize to create valid quantum state (amplitudes)
    amplitudes = np.sqrt(probabilities / np.sum(probabilities))
    
    # Create circuit with StatePreparation
    qc = QuantumCircuit(num_qubits)
    qc.append(StatePreparation(amplitudes), range(num_qubits))
    
    return qc
```

### Probability Distribution Loader
```python
# quactuary/quantum/state_preparation/probability_loader.py
from scipy import stats
import numpy as np

def prepare_lognormal_state(mu: float, sigma: float, 
                           num_qubits: int = 6) -> np.ndarray:
    """
    Prepare lognormal distribution for quantum encoding.
    Based on Excess Loss algorithm approach.
    """
    # Create discretized domain
    num_points = 2**num_qubits
    x_min, x_max = 0.1, 10.0  # Domain bounds
    x_points = np.linspace(x_min, x_max, num_points)
    
    # Calculate probabilities
    dist = stats.lognorm(s=sigma, scale=np.exp(mu))
    probabilities = dist.pdf(x_points)
    
    # Normalize
    probabilities = probabilities / np.sum(probabilities)
    
    return probabilities, x_points
```

### Efficient State Preparation Patterns
```python
def uniform_superposition(num_qubits: int) -> QuantumCircuit:
    """Create uniform superposition using Hadamard gates."""
    qc = QuantumCircuit(num_qubits)
    qc.h(range(num_qubits))  # Efficient broadcast
    return qc

def controlled_rotation_encoding(angles: List[float]) -> QuantumCircuit:
    """Encode using controlled rotations for sparse states."""
    n = int(np.ceil(np.log2(len(angles))))
    qc = QuantumCircuit(n)
    
    # Use gray code ordering for efficiency
    for i, angle in enumerate(angles):
        if angle != 0:
            # Apply controlled rotation based on binary representation
            binary = format(i, f'0{n}b')
            control_qubits = [j for j, bit in enumerate(binary) if bit == '1']
            if control_qubits:
                qc.mcry(angle, control_qubits[:-1], control_qubits[-1])
            else:
                qc.ry(angle, 0)
    
    return qc
```

### Validation Utilities
```python
def validate_quantum_state(amplitudes: np.ndarray) -> bool:
    """Validate that amplitudes form a valid quantum state."""
    # Check normalization
    norm = np.sum(np.abs(amplitudes)**2)
    if not np.isclose(norm, 1.0, rtol=1e-10):
        raise ValueError(f"State not normalized: norm={norm}")
    
    # Check power of 2
    n = len(amplitudes)
    if n & (n - 1) != 0:
        raise ValueError(f"State size must be power of 2, got {n}")
    
    return True
```

### Best Practices from Research
1. **Use StatePreparation for general distributions** - Most efficient for arbitrary states
2. **Optimize circuit depth** - Use transpile with optimization_level=3
3. **Consider sparsity** - Use specialized encodings for sparse distributions
4. **Validate inputs** - Always check normalization and dimensions
5. **Use analytical solutions when possible** - Avoid numerical approximations

## Output Log
*(This section is populated as work progresses on the task)*

[2025-05-27 02:00]: Task started - Status changed to in_progress
[2025-05-27 02:03]: Subtask 1 & 2 completed - Created quantum/state_preparation module structure and implemented amplitude_encode() function with comprehensive docstrings
[2025-05-27 02:05]: Subtasks 3-6 completed - Implemented uniform_superposition(), controlled_rotation_encoding(), validation utilities, and probability distribution loaders including lognormal preparation
[2025-05-27 02:13]: Subtask 7 completed - Created comprehensive unit tests for all state preparation functions. All 35 tests passing
[2025-05-27 02:14]: Task substantially complete - All core functionality implemented and tested. Performance benchmarks deferred to future optimization phase
